title: User Interface (UI) Customization
---

The viewer's user interface (UI) is completely customizable. An existing viewer user interface can be tweaked, or a new user interface can be built from scratch. Use vanilla HTML/CSS/JavaScript or your favorite UI framework, such as React.js or Vue.js.

The user interface is specified on viewer creation with a JavaScript object or an object that specifies an [ES Module](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules). This object contain functions that implement **actions** that are called as UI [state machines](https://xstate.js.org/docs/) that respond to events or nested objects that provide actions for child state machines. A few example actions are: `toggleDarkMode`, `toggleUICollapsed`.

Each [action function](https://xstate.js.org/docs/about/glossary.html#action) is expected to accept two arguments: `context` and `event`.

The `context` is the current state machine context. A `context` object is comprised of the context object generated by the [viewer configuration](./config/) and additional objects generated by the UI or renderer. For example, the `createInterface` action may add a `div` property to the `context` for the UI that other UI actions may reference later.

The `event` argument is the current event object that triggered the action. An `event` object contains the event name in all upper case. Optionally, the `event` may contain a payload in the `data` property. In addition to responding to events, a UI implementation will trigger events from user input and pass those events to the state machine by calling `context.service.send(<triggeredEvent>)`. For example, `collapseUIButton.addEventListener('click', () => { context.service.send('TOGGLE_UI_COLLAPSED')`.

## UI Options Architecture

**Warning**: the viewer machine's architecture is experimental and it is subject to change without modification to the major version of the package. We mean it!

Available actions can be observed in the [Reference UI Machine Options](https://github.com/Kitware/itk-vtk-viewer/blob/master/src/UI/Reference/referenceUIMachineOptions.js). If an action is not implemented, it is a no-op. Nested options objects correspond to the nested state machines. They are:

* [`main`](https://github.com/Kitware/itk-vtk-viewer/blob/master/src/UI/Reference/Main/mainUIMachineOptions.js): UI components impacting the entire viewer's state. For example, the UI to toggle fullscreen mode or change the viewer's background color.
* [`layers`](https://github.com/Kitware/itk-vtk-viewer/blob/master/src/UI/Reference/Layers/layersUIMachineOptions.js): UI components related to dataset layers. For example, the UI to select a layer or toggle its visibility.
* [`widgets`](https://github.com/Kitware/itk-vtk-viewer/blob/master/src/UI/Reference/Widgets/widgetsUIMachineOptions.js): UI components for interactive widget parameters. For example, display the current distance measured by a distance widget.
* [`images`](https://github.com/Kitware/itk-vtk-viewer/blob/master/src/UI/Reference/Images/imagesUIMachineOptions.js): UI components related to the currently selected image layer. For example, the current color map used.
* `geometries` (todo): UI components related to the currently selected geometry layer. For example, the current geometry opacity.
* `pointSets` (todo): UI components related to the currently selected point set layer. For example, the current point set opacity.

## Example: Remove Plane Index Sliders

This example demonstrates how to remove the plane index sliders from the Reference UI.
